+++
publishDate = "2018-07-30"
title = "On dilettantism, craft and mastery"
tags = ["craft", "reflection", "philosophy"]

+++

I've always been a generalist. And this has served me well. It seems there is
utility in this trait, especially in the realm of tech, and consulting in
particular. The essence of which is being able to efficiently filter noise and
extract value across many different contexts. It relies a lot on the ability to
identify patterns and make disparate connections, analogies, metaphors, models.
And the dilettante has an endless plethora of references to draw from.

Since I can remember, I've always had the urge to learn and understand
everything I encounter. How do countries work and why do starfish have an uneven
amount of limbs? What kind of tax system can support a standing army in the iron
age[^roman]? It was probably inevitable that I'd end up in tech. But apart from
that, I think it also translates into being more resilient to information
overload than the average person. This probably makes you suitably resilient to
the often dysfunctional[^programming_sucks] world of software development.

All of this has an implicit trade-off (always, of course). It means I often
never gain a deep understanding of topics, often because I never needed to.
There's always the next thing that demands my attention and "perfect is the
enemy of good", after all. This isn't inherently a bad thing. In business, good
enough is a immensely valuable principle to optimise for. However, after
spending most of my life until wading through the marshlands of ambient
knowledge I think it's time to strive for more rigour and deliberate grit. The
dilettante must strive to be a polymath, but never a specialist --
specialisation is for insects (and doctors).

> “A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an invasion, butcher a hog, conn a ship, design a building, write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve equations, analyze a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer, cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently, die gallantly. Specialization is for insects.” -- Robert A. Heinlein

[^roman]: If you're really [interested](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTuD149AbVI).
